Add some documentation about how declaring COM interfaces works in .NET, with focus on interface inheritance and some of its pitfalls (#34921)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/native-interop/qualify-net-types-for-interoperation.md

---

> # Qualifying .NET Types for COM Interoperation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Qualify .NET types for COM interoperation
```

> ## Exposing .NET Types to COM

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Expose .NET types to COM
```

     Neither COM clients nor .NET clients can create abstract types.  
  
 When exported to COM, the inheritance hierarchy of a managed type is flattened. Versioning also differs between managed and unmanaged environments. Types exposed to COM do not have the same versioning characteristics as other managed types.  

> ## Consuming COM types from .NET

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Consume COM types from .NET
```

> If you intend to consume COM types from .NET and you do not want to use tools like [Tlbimp.exe (Type Library Importer)](../../framework/tools/tlbimp-exe-type-library-importer.md), you must follow these guidelines:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you intend to consume COM types from .NET and you don't want to use tools like [Tlbimp.exe (Type Library Importer)](../../framework/tools/tlbimp-exe-type-library-importer.md), you must follow these guidelines:
```

- Interfaces must have the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> applied.
- Interfaces must have the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.GuidAttribute> applied with the Interface ID for the COM interface.

> - Interfaces should have the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.InterfaceTypeAttribute> applied to specify the base interface type of this interface (IUnknown, IDispatch, or IInspectable).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Interfaces should have the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.InterfaceTypeAttribute> applied to specify the base interface type of this interface (`IUnknown`, `IDispatch`, or `IInspectable`).
```

>   - The default option is to have the base type of IDispatch and append the declared methods to the expected virtual function table for the interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - The default option is to have the base type of `IDispatch` and append the declared methods to the expected virtual function table for the interface.
```

>   - Only .NET Framework supports specifying a base type of IInspectable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Only .NET Framework supports specifying a base type of `IInspectable`.
```

> Many more customization options exist and they are mentioned in the [Applying Interop Attributes](apply-interop-attributes.md) documentation, but these guidelines provide the minimum requirements for common scenarios.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These guidelines provide the minimum requirements for common scenarios. Many more customization options exist and are described in [Applying Interop Attributes](apply-interop-attributes.md).
```

### Defining COM interfaces in .NET

> When .NET code tries to call a method on a COM object through an interface with the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute>, it needs to build up a virtual function table (also known as vtable or vftable) to from the .NET definition of the interface to determine the native code to call. This process is very complex, but we can look at some simple cases to see how it works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When .NET code tries to call a method on a COM object through an interface with the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> attribute, it needs to build up a virtual function table (also known as vtable or vftable) to form the .NET definition of the interface to determine the native code to call. This process is complex. The following examples show some simple cases.
```

We will start with a COM interface with a few methods:

```c++
struct IComInterface : public IUnknown
{
    STDMETHOD(Method)() = 0;
    STDMETHOD(Method2)() = 0;
};
```

For this interface, the following table describes its virtual function table layout:

> | `IComInterface` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface::Method` |
| 4 | `IComInterface::Method2` |

> As we see, each method is added to the virtual function table in the order it was declared. The particular order is defined by the C++ compiler, but for simple cases without overloads, declaration order defines the order in the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each method is added to the virtual function table in the order it was declared. The particular order is defined by the C++ compiler, but for simple cases without overloads, declaration order defines the order in the table.
```

To declare a .NET interface that corresponds to this interface, we would declare it as follows:

```csharp
[ComImport]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
[Guid(/* The IID for IComInterface */)]
interface IComInterface
{
    void Method();
    void Method2();
}
```

The <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.InterfaceTypeAttribute> specifies the base interface. It provides a few options:

| <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComInterfaceType> Value | Base Interface Type | Behavior for members on attributed interface |
|------------|---------------|------------------|
| `InterfaceIsIUnknown` | `IUnknown` | Virtual function table first has the members of `IUnknown`, then the members of this interface in declaration order. |

> | `InterfaceIsIDispatch` | `IDispatch` | Members are not added to the virtual function table. They are only accessible through `IDispatch` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `InterfaceIsIDispatch` | `IDispatch` | Members are not added to the virtual function table. They're only accessible through `IDispatch`. |
```

| `InterfaceIsDual` | `IDispatch` | Virtual function table first has the members of `IDispatch`, then the members of this interface in declaration order. |
| `InterfaceIsIInspectable` | `IInspectable` | Virtual function table first has the members of `IInspectable`, then the members of this interface in declaration order. Only supported on .NET Framework. |

> #### COM Interface Inheritance and .NET

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### COM interface inheritance and .NET
```

> The COM interop system that uses the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> does not interact with interface inheritance, so it can cause unexpected behavior unless the some mitigating steps are taken.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The COM interop system that uses the <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> does not interact with interface inheritance, so it can cause unexpected behavior unless some mitigating steps are taken.
```

> The COM source generator that uses the `System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` does interact with interface inheritance, so it behaves more as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The COM source generator that uses the `System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` attribute does interact with interface inheritance, so it behaves more as expected.
```

> ##### COM Interface Inheritance in C++

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### COM interface inheritance in C++
```

In C++, developers can declare COM interfaces that derive from other COM interfaces as follows:

```cpp
struct IComInterface : public IUnknown
{
    STDMETHOD(Method)() = 0;
    STDMETHOD(Method2)() = 0;
};

struct IComInterface2 : public IComInterface
{
    STDMETHOD(Method3)() = 0;
};
```

> This declaration style is regularly as a mechanism to add methods to COM objects without changing existing interfaces, which would be a breaking change. This inheritance mechanism results in the following virtual function table layouts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This declaration style is regularly used as a mechanism to add methods to COM objects without changing existing interfaces, which would be a breaking change. This inheritance mechanism results in the following virtual function table layouts:
```

> | `IComInterface` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface::Method` |
| 4 | `IComInterface::Method2` |

> | `IComInterface2` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface2` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface::Method` |
| 4 | `IComInterface::Method2` |
| 5 | `IComInterface2::Method3` |

> As a result, it is very easy to call a method defined on `IComInterface` from an `IComInterface2*`. Specifically, calling a method on a base interface does not require a call to `QueryInterface` to get a pointer to the base interface. Additionally, C++ allows an implicit conversion from `IComInterface2*` to `IComInterface*`, which is well defined and allows avoiding a `QueryInterface` call again. As a result, in C or C++, you never need to call `QueryInterface` to get to the base type if you do not want to, which can allow some performance improvements.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, it's easy to call a method defined on `IComInterface` from an `IComInterface2*`. Specifically, calling a method on a base interface does not require a call to `QueryInterface` to get a pointer to the base interface. Additionally, C++ allows an implicit conversion from `IComInterface2*` to `IComInterface*`, which is well defined and lets you avoid calling a `QueryInterface` again. As a result, in C or C++, you never have to call `QueryInterface` to get to the base type if you don't want to, which can allow some performance improvements.
```

> > Note: WinRT interfaces do not follow this inheritance model. They are defined to follow the same model as the `[ComImport]`-based COM interop model in .NET.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
> WinRT interfaces don't follow this inheritance model. They're defined to follow the same model as the `[ComImport]`-based COM interop model in .NET.
```

> ###### COM Interface Inheritance in .NET with <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Interface inheritance with <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute>
```

Reviewer: Is this supposed to be a subheading of "COM interface inheritance in C++"?

> In .NET, C# code that looks like interface inheritance isn't actually interface inheritance. Let's look at the following code:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In .NET, C# code that looks like interface inheritance isn't actually interface inheritance. Consider the following code:
```

```csharp
interface I
{
    void Method1();
}
interface J : I
{
    void Method2();
}
```

> This code does not say, "`J` implements `I`." The code actually says, "any type that implements `J` must also implement `I`." This difference leads to the fundamental design decision that makes interface inheritance in <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute>-based interop unergonomic. Interfaces are always considered on their own; an interface's base interface list has no impact on any calculations to determing a virtual function table for a given .NET interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code does not say, "`J` implements `I`." The code actually says, "any type that implements `J` must also implement `I`." This difference leads to the fundamental design decision that makes interface inheritance in <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute>-based interop unergonomic. Interfaces are always considered on their own; an interface's base interface list has no impact on any calculations to determine a virtual function table for a given .NET interface.
```

> As a result, the natural equivalent of the above provided C++ COM interface example leads to a different virtual function table layout.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a result, the natural equivalent of the previous C++ COM interface example leads to a different virtual function table layout.
```

C# code:

```csharp
[ComImport]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface
{
    void Method();
    void Method2();
}

[ComImport]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface2 : IComInterface
{
    void Method3();
}
```

> Virtual Function Table layouts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Virtual function table layouts:
```

> | `IComInterface` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface::Method` |
| 4 | `IComInterface::Method2` |

> | `IComInterface2` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface2` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface2::Method3` |

> As these virtual function tables differ from the C++ example, this will lead to serious problems at runtime. The correct definition of these interfaces in .NET with <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As these virtual function tables differ from the C++ example, this will lead to serious problems at run time. The correct definition of these interfaces in .NET with <xref:System.Runtime.InteropServices.ComImportAttribute> is as follows:
```

```csharp
[ComImport]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface
{
    void Method();
    void Method2();
}

[ComImport]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface2 : IComInterface
{
    new void Method();
    new void Method2();
    void Method3();
}
```

> Each method from the base interface types must be redeclared, as at the metadata level, `IComInterface2` does not implement `IComInterface`, but only specifies that implementors of `IComInterface2` must also implement `IComInterface`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At the metadata level, `IComInterface2` doesn't implement `IComInterface` but only specifies that implementers of `IComInterface2` must also implement `IComInterface`. Thus, each method from the base interface types must be redeclared.
```

> ###### COM Interface Inheritance in .NET with `System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` (.NET 8 Preview 4 or newer)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
###### Interface inheritance with `GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` (.NET 8 Preview 4 or later)
```

> The COM source generator triggered by the `GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` implements C# interface inheritance as COM interface inheritance, so the virtual function tables are laid out as expected. If we take our prior example, the correct definition of these interfaces in .NET with `System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The COM source generator triggered by the `GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` implements C# interface inheritance as COM interface inheritance, so the virtual function tables are laid out as expected. If you take the previous example, the correct definition of these interfaces in .NET with `System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshalling.GeneratedComInterfaceAttribute` is as follows:
```

```csharp
[GeneratedComInterface]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface
{
    void Method();
    void Method2();
}

[GeneratedComInterface]
[InterfaceType(ComInterfaceType.InterfaceIsIUnknown)]
interface IComInterface2 : IComInterface
{
    void Method3();
}
```

> The methods of the base interfaces do not need to be redeclared and should not be redeclared. The following table describs the resulting virtual function tables:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The methods of the base interfaces do not need to be redeclared and should not be redeclared. The following table describes the resulting virtual function tables:
```

> | `IComInterface` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```

|-----------------------------|-------------|
| 0 | `IUnknown::QueryInterface` |
| 1 | `IUnknown::AddRef` |
| 2 | `IUnknown::Release` |
| 3 | `IComInterface::Method` |
| 4 | `IComInterface::Method2` |

> | `IComInterface2` Virtual Function Table slot | Method name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `IComInterface2` virtual function table slot | Method name |
```
